**NOTE:** This crate is in early stages of development and is not yet intended
to be used in production applications. The crate API is a subject for breaking
changes.

This crate is designed to bridge the gap between gRPC's design principles and
the idiomatic Rust approach to data structures. It automates the generation of
"mirror" data structures that unwrap all necessary fields from `Option<T>` and
provides `TryFrom` implementations for converting from the original
autogenerated structs.

### Why This Matters

With the evolution of protobuf to version 3, the notion of required fields was
phased out. In the context of gRPC, this means every nested field in your
messages becomes optional by default. The rationale is to shift field validation
responsibilities from the protocol to the application level, avoiding the
complexities required fields introduce in evolving data contracts.

Prost and Tonic, adhering to these updated protobuf and gRPC conventions,
generate Rust data structures where non-primitive nested fields are encapsulated
in `Option<T>`. While this aligns with Rust's safety and nullability features,
it can be cumbersome, especially when certain fields are inherently required for
your data structures to be logically coherent. In Rust, the preferred paradigm
is to prevent invalid states at compile time, a goal not fully met by Prost's
autogenerated structs, which often lead to excessive unwrapping and referencing.

The proposed solution is to create "sanitized" mirror structures where all
essential fields are directly accessible, not wrapped in `Option`. By
implementing `TryFrom<OriginalMessage> for MirrorMessage`, these structures
adhere to Rust's design principles, ensuring data integrity and enhancing code
clarity.

The primary challenge with this approach is the extensive boilerplate code
required to create and maintain these mirror structures. This crate introduces a
procedural macro to eliminate this boilerplate, automatically generating the
necessary code, simplifying maintenance, and enabling you to focus on your
application's logic.

### Quick start guide

Let's say we have a `bar.proto` file like this, located in the `./proto/foo`
directory in your crate:

```proto
syntax = "proto3";

package foo.bar;

message MsgA {
    int32 f1 = 1;
}

message MsgB {
    MsgA f1 = 1;
    MsgA f2 = 2;
    repeated MsgA f3 = 3;
}
```

First, generate a rust source code with [prost](https://crates.io/crates/prost)
or [tonic](https://crates.io/crates/tonic). Please refer to the crates
documentation for full explanation of building process.

This quick start guide will use `prost`.

First, to use `prost-unwrap`, you need to specify the out directory for prost.
This is needed because `prost-unwrap` needs to read these files to generate
mirroring structs, and the `OUT_DIR` env variable is unavailable at the time
procedural macro is expanded. To avoid commiting the generated code, add
`.gitignore` file into out directory, with the `*.rs` entry.

Add the `out_dir` call to the prost-build config in your `build.rs`.
`tonic-build` offers similar option.

```rust,ignore
use std::path::Path;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    let inner_proto = Path::new("proto/foo/bar.proto");
    let include_dir = Path::new("proto");

    prost_build::Config::new()
        .out_dir(".proto_out")
        .compile_protos(&[inner_proto], &[include_dir])?;

    Ok(())
}
```

After running the `cargo build`, you should see the generated code (`foo.bar.rs`
file) in the out directory.

When working with prost-generated structs, it is required to organize the
generated code into nested modules that will mirror your protobuf package
structure. For the example above, you should encapsulate the generated Rust code
as follows (wrap all the generated code, including package modules, with
`generated` module to isolate it).

```rust,ignore
pub mod generated {
    pub mod foo {
        pub mod bar {
            include!(".proto/foo.bar.rs"));
        }
    }
}
```

For `prost-unwrap`-generated code we will add a separate module tree with the
similar structure.

```rust,ignore
pub mod unwrapped {
    pub mod foo {
        pub mod bar {
            // insert the prost_unwrap:include! macro call here
        }
    }
}
```

`prost-unwrap` provides the `include!` macro to include the generated code into
your source. The macro takes an argument list in form of a method call chain.

```rust,ignore
prost_unwrap:include!(
    with_original_mod(crate::generated)
    .with_this_mod(crate::unwrapped)
    .from_source(foo::bar, ".proto/foo.bar.rs")
    .with_struct(MsgB, [f1])
);
```

This configuration instructs prost-unwrap to:

- Extract structs and enums from the file `".proto/foo.bar.rs"`.
- Copy the `MsgB` struct from `crate::generated::foo::bar`, converting the `f1`
  field from `Option<T>` to `T`.
- Generate the `TryFrom` and `Into` traits for all transferred structs and
  enums.

With the generated and unwrapped code, you can perform conversions like these:

```rust,ignore
fn a(msg: crate::unwrapped::foo::bar::MsgB)
-> crate::generated::foo::bar::MsgB
{
    msg.into() // Converts unwrapped struct back to the original form.
}

fn b(msg: crate::generated::foo::bar::MsgB)
-> Result<crate::unwrapped::foo::bar::MsgB, Box<dyn Error>>
{
    msg.try_into()? // Attempts conversion, returning an error if the
                    // 'msg.f1' field is 'None'.
}
```

Take a look at the [integration tests](prost-unwrap-proto-tests/tests/)
directory to find another use cases. Note:
[ui](prost-unwrap-proto-tests/tests/ui/) directory contains negative (failing)
tests, do not consider those! :)

### `include!` macro breakdown

The `include!` macro takes a pseudocode, in a form of method call chain, as an
argument. The pseudo-method calls may be arranged in any order.

The call chain must contain one call of `with_original_mod`, `with_this_mod` and
`from_source`. At least one `with_struct` or `with_enum` must present as well.

##### `with_original_mod`

Specifies the absolute path (starting with `crate::`) of the wrapper module,
containing the original generated source code. The path is required because of
some scoping limitations rust procedural macros have.

Example:

```rust,ignore
prost_unwrap:include!(
    with_original_mod(crate::generated)
);
```

##### `with_this_mod`

Specifies the absolute path of the wrapper module, containing the
`prost-unwrap`-generated source code.

```rust,ignore
prost_unwrap:include!(
    with_this_mod(crate::unwrapped)
);
```

##### `from_source`

Specifies the source code location along with the relative module path this code
is wrapped in. The relative path must be the same within original code wrapper
and the unwrapped code wrapper.

In most cases this path will match the package name insode your proto file
(`foo.bar` in our case) and the file name (`foo.bar.rs` in our case).

```rust,ignore
prost_unwrap:include!(
    from_source(com::acme, ".proto/com.acme.rs")
);
```

##### `with_struct`

Specifies the struct relative path with the list of fields that need to be
unwrapped from `Option<T>` into `T`.

```rust,ignore
prost_unwrap:include!(
    with_struct(AcmeMessage, [field1, field2, field3])
);
```

##### `with_enum`

Specifies the enum relative path, that also needs to be included into the
generated code (see "Known issues" section).

```rust,ignore
prost_unwrap:include!(
    with_enum(AcmeEnum)
);
```

### Generated code

`prost-unwrap::include!` will generate the following pieces of code (along with
the copied structs and enums):

- The `Error` struct, implementing the `Debug`, `Display` and
  `std::error::Error` traits.
- Helper functions for converting original structs into copied structs, if
  wrapped into `Option<T>` (optional fields) or `Vec<T>` (repeated fields).

The copied structs and enums have prost-related attributes stripped:

- `Message` derive for structs;
- `Enumeration` derive for enums;
- field-specific attributes for structs and enums.

One can always inspect the generated code using the
[cargo-expand](https://crates.io/crates/cargo-expand).

### Features to be implemented

- Partial copying: for now `prost-unwrap` copies all the structs and enums it
  can find in the linked source code. It is possible to copy a subset of data
  structures, if this subset is self-contained, meaning that members of the
  subset only reference the members of the subset.

- Item suffix: since the original and copied struct have the same name, the
  structs need to be aliased somehow to have both of them in the same scope. By
  implementing suffixes, it will be possible to automatically rename copied
  structs.

### Known issues

- Useless `with_enum` options: since `prost-unwrap` copies all structs and
  enums, this option is useless until partial copying is implemented.
- Copied structs and enums lack `Debug` and `Default` trait implementations
  (these are provided by prost `Message` and `Enumeration` derives, which are
  stripped).
- Tests do not cover all possible usage scenarios.

### Contributing

This crate is in early stages of development. If you encounter any surprising
behavior, unclear documentation or other problem, please, feel free to create an
issue on github.

If you found a bug, please create a minimal reproducible scenario (proto file
plus rust code) and put it into github issue.

If you feel proficient in rust enough to criticize the source code
inefficiencies, do the same.
